JUDY WOODRUFF: As officials around the country
are considering how to reopen their communities,
there's great concern and debate brewing over
how long shutdowns should last and whether
reopening too soon could be dangerous.
Donald McNeil reported extensively on these
questions for The New York Times in a piece
that explored how society could be profoundly
affected and disrupted for the next two years.
He's been covering epidemics for close to
two decades for The Times, and he joins me
now.
Donald McNeil, thank you so much for joining
us.
You do open your piece quoting scientists
as saying, this could last for sometime.
Why? What do they base that on?
DONALD MCNEIL JR., The New York Times: Well,
you know, basically, they say that the notion
that we're all going to be out of this in
two or three months, and that football stadiums
are going to be open in the fall and we will
be all out together, is a fantasy, that, right
now, somewhere north of 300 million Americans
are still uninfected and vulnerable to the
virus.
If we all go out again, things will look good
for two or three weeks, and then suddenly
the infections will begin to tick up, and
then the emergency rooms will fill, and we
will be back on our way towards two million
dead, which we were when the lockdown started.
So that can't happen. And we won't really
get out of this until we have either a vaccine
or a prophylactic pill that will let us out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the vaccine.
We are told, what is it, Dr. Fauci says a
year, a year-and-a-half. What do the scientists
you talk to say about that, why it takes so
long?
DONALD MCNEIL JR.: Well, they say, look, a
year or 18 months is really optimistic.
The record for making a vaccine in this country
is the mumps vaccine, which was made in back
the '50s, and it took four years. We -- now,
things have set up in modern times. We actually
have vaccine can -- that part has sped up.
You can make a vaccine candidate very quickly.
You can't speed up the immune system. You
still have to do the tests in people.
And coronaviruses have problems. They have
a tendency to create a thing call antibody-dependent
enhancement when other vaccines have been
made, which means the vaccine can actually
make you more likely to get the disease, rather
than less, which would be a disaster.
So you have to test carefully against that.
And then there's the production problem. Most
vaccines are made in batches of five to 10
million doses, because we have about four
million babies born in this country every
year. But if we need a vaccine that every
American has to take, that's either 300 million
or 600 million doses, if you need two shots.
So that's a whole different order of magnitude
in vaccine production and getting the factories
working to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A huge, almost an unimaginable
amount.
What about treatment? You mentioned medicines.
What about treatment for the coronavirus?
Could that make a difference in how people
respond?
DONALD MCNEIL JR.: It can.
And we're in the clinical trials now. And
those are going to take probably at least
a couple more months, depending on how many
people get enrolled in the trials and how
they go.
Most of the medicines we know something about
tend to help people who are already hospitalized
and in trouble, rather than being something
that you could pop and take as a pill, like
you can the PrEP for HIV.
So we're not -- I mean, there's been information
from the White House that the hydroxychloroquine
will work as a preventative. Nobody really
thinks that. It might help people who are
likely to crash, because it's an immune system
suppressant, but it's not an antiviral.
And most of the antivirals we know about are
-- they're not Lazarus drugs. They don't save
you. We're not seeing anything like that,
the way antibiotics used to make people come
back from near death.
So, it may be a long time before we have a
pill that's prophylactic. And then, again,
we have to make 300 million doses per day,
make it as ubiquitous as aspirin. So that
will take a while too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about testing, Donald
McNeil. There's so much discussion about that
now, about how there's just not the capacity
for testing that is needed.
But how much does that matter to getting -- getting
us even close to back to normal?
DONALD MCNEIL JR.: It matters enormously.
I mean, when Dr. Fauci says something like
the virus will tell us, what he means is,
we have to get a stable platform of the same
number of tests being done all across the
country every day. And then you -- and they
have to be rapid too. You can't have it three,
four days, go out to state labs.
And then you want it -- you watch that level
of testing to see how many positives and negatives
you get once you have got a base. And different
people have different estimates as to how
many tests we need.
I mean, I heard one estimate 750,000 per day.
I heard another estimate from Harvard that
came out today that they think five to 10
million per day, per day, in order to understand
across the country where the virus is rising
or falling, so that you would know, hey, we
have got a hot spot here, we're going to have
to go into something more like a lockdown
in order to get those people out of the path
of the virus.
So, you're going to need a lot of tests in
order able to be spot that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, when people say, well,
once we begin to say we're part of the way
to normal, how much worry is there that we're
going to see a resurgence of this?
This is not a virus that's just going to go
away, is it?
DONALD MCNEIL JR.: No.
And nobody really believes the virus is going
to fade in the summer either. It's spreading
in India. It's spreading in Brazil. It's spreading
in the Philippines. It's spreading very aptly
in hot weather countries.
And that's typical with viruses, that if they
have victims they have never seen before,
the temperature doesn't really make a big
difference.
The worry is that, as we're in lockdown, we
may be the hammer and the dance. The hammer
has come down, and now we sort of dance out
of lockdown for a little while, but then realize,
uh-oh, we're getting infections, and that
will mean deaths rise again, so we go back
into lockdown. And then wait a little while,
it'll drop.
And on the epidemiological models, it looks
like a row of shark's teeth, where you see
deaths rising, and then deaths following,
and then deaths rising and deaths falling.
And that could go on until we have a vaccine,
which might be take two or three years.
So a lot of things might happen. Some people
might deliberately decide to infect themselves
to get out, young, healthy people. That will
be a very risky thing to do.
But people may just get really, really fed
up of being in lockdown, while the rest of
the world is out having fun and taking their
jobs. So there will be a lot of psychological
changes in this country over the next couple
of years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And do we ever get back to
a pre-COVID normal, if we can remember what
that was like?
DONALD MCNEIL JR.: Hopefully. Hopefully, there
will be a vaccine, ultimately. And that will
-- once we're all protected, we're back to
the where we are with flu shots and measles
shots and everything else. Life will go back
on again.
And maybe life will become better. This will
have -- this is like going through a war.
And in the postwar periods after World War
I and World War II, people's attitude towards
lives changed. They wanted the League of Nations.
They wanted the United Nations. They -- income
equality changed.
Life was, for people who lived through that
generation, often, they recognized it was
more precious. It was like living through
the Blitz. People began to know what was important
in life and what wasn't.
But that's sort of how I stay hopeful through
all this. But we're not there yet. And we
got to go through some pain before then.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that's something we can
at least hang on to, even as we -- as we realize
the reality of this.
Donald McNeil with "The New York Times," thank
you so much.
DONALD MCNEIL JR.: Thank you for inviting
me.